It just means,
I don't think the monkeys have a sense of fairness like you and I have,
but I do think they have a sense of hold on, you're getting more than I am.
I can't let this happen. Otherwise I'm screwed.
And there's lots of great evidence that if you let that happen,
then you're screwed. But.
Do the females have that same sense of competitiveness that they need to have
the exact same thing. Those other are having to get angry?
Well, here's the thing. Um,
it depends on whether your mating system is going to be pair bonding or not.
So if you're a frog or a, um, lots of different frogs, not all of them,
a laughing tree frog, or if you're a elephant seal or something,
we'll all the females mate with the best male. Cause his job is just sex.
And so every female can add the best one or the either in a situation where
they've got no choice, like the elephant seals,
he controls a rookery or in a situation where they just listen to all the
croaking and then they got you're the best Croker. You're the dad.
But if you're pair bonding like humans or like lots of other animals,
birds, et cetera,
the then what you need is you've got competition on both sides.
So she's always competing to get the best male and he's always competing to get
the best female.
Now there's reasons why a male male competition is always a bit more intense
than female, female competition, but both of them are there.
And the more monogamous the system gets,
the more both sides can be for each other.
Hmm. Interesting.
So what about in the case of like Bonobos where they're so
polyamorous.
And elbows are super interesting system.
So you've got lots of polyamorous animals, um, but novels are interested.
Their chimps are also, you know,
so if you look at one of the great ways to look at our ancestors and what their
lives were like,
cause you look in your trousers and the size of your testicles tells you a lot
about what sort of mating system your ancestors had.
So gorillas have tiny little testicles.
And the reason that they have such tiny testicles is they use their huge body to
drive away. They're the males. And then all the females are in his harem.
So he doesn't need big testicles because he only needs enough sperm in order to
inseminate the females. He's got it. Doesn't take much sperm to inseminate.
Anyone, female and testicles are really expensive tissue to make.
And if you own a pair and you land on them, you know, they're uncomfortable too.
Right?
And so then you look at our testicles and they're quite a bit bigger than a
gorillas, but they're nowhere near the size of a Chimp or banaba both, you know,
they're basically in many ways, almost the same beast.
And so although socially quite different. And um,
they have a system where they basically have to wash out the guy who was there
before them. And so it takes really big testicles to have sperm competition.
So their competition isn't by fighting each other though.
There's a degree of that too.
They know full well that when she comes into estrus into heat,
there's going to be a line.
And if you're fifth in line and you can wash everybody out before you might end
up the dead.
Yeah. There's a funny way of putting it. So it's, uh, it's uh,
this, this testicle size is directly proportionate to the number of promiscuous
females.
Well, that's right. The promiscuity of the mating system.
And so if you look at our mating system,
we clearly evolved to be largely monogamous, but not entirely.
Our testicles are unnecessarily large for, for an entirely monogamous species.
And so we're a little bit on the wash. The guy out ahead of us, w.
It'd be there's many people that make arguments that are monogamy is socially
reinforced and it's not natural. Look.
If you look at hunter gatherers and so the best,
the best way that we get a sense of, well, what,
what did we evolve to do is to look at the remaining hunter gatherer societies.
Particularly if you look at what are called immediate return on togethers.
So there are people who eat today, what they killed today.
And you've got a lot of hunter gatherers. Once they left the equator,
they could store food and everything changed for them. And they actually,
in many of their behaviors,
they look a lot like us and we can come back to that if you'd like,
but if you look at hunter gathers around the equator,
they're typically immediate return kill eat.
And so those guys tend to be, tend to be, there's always,
of course human differences where a super variable species,
but they tend to be serially monogamous. And so some people pair up for life,
lots of people pair up for five,
seven years and then break apart and pair up again.
And so you have a sequence of children with the secrets of people, but,
but largely monogamous, not entirely.
And in fact, monogamous during those time periods, it's.
Largely,
now we know every single animal we've ever described as monogamous when we do
the DNA, we now find they're not entirely, but they're mostly.
Hmm. Interesting. So, um, do you, have you ever read sex at Dawn?
What did you think of that?
Um, no offense, but I think it's total crap.
Chris. Ryan, do you hear that? Everybody's rocking on your book, bro. Uh, what,
what did you think is crap about it?
I just don't think the system works that way. The, the explain.
To people that may or may not know, I haven't.
Read that book now since it came out. So let me remind, remind me of the thesis.
You mean, the idea.
Is that we evolved in these small tribes of people that
essentially shared sexual partners.
That's. And so the thing is that, what makes you say that so confidently? Well,
I don't know. I shouldn't say it quite so confidently. You're absolutely right.
I believe that's. How's that? Okay. Why do you believe that's? Because, um,
so human beings have very clear, evolved jealousy systems,
and they're not just a product of the world that we live in today.
You can see jealousy among hunter gatherers as well.
Now the thing is they get jealous about different things because of course,
men and women have slightly different pressure on them,
but they both get jealous by infidelity.
Now that's not to say that the book is incorrect about some societies in some
places, because one of the interesting things about humans is our flexibility.
And so you can create a system and some hunter gatherers have where there's a
lot of that, a ton of that.
There's some really interesting ones where literally once the woman gets
pregnant,
she then starts to sleep with all the other males because she thinks her baby
will gain the qualities of all the men that she sleeps with.
So I'm not trying to claim that we're always monogamous because absolutely
that's untrue.
But I do think that the dominant system is one of serial monogamy. And I,
the reason I think that that's the dominant system is this is kind of the deal
that we made whereby um, the males go out and do the hunting,
the females go out and do gathering. And that's basically universal.
She tends to for him, and that comes back to the fire point you made,
which we can come back to. And, um, and so they share resources and,
and he's happy to share resources and do his best to kind of,
sort of look out for our kids. I mean, human males aren't,
we don't take as much care as human females do of our kids,
but we're much better than the other great apes.
And so that level of investment is going to make is,
tends to be to the degree that he believes that he's the father of the kids.
Now you have societies where he doesn't know that really all are polyamorous
like that by all means,
I don't know what percentage they are and it could even be they're more common
than I believe. But when that happens, the systems tend to change a little bit.
And he's a little bit less willing to look out,
try to help out kids other than to do her a favor,
unless the kid looks at all that himself.
Now, what about why having a system,
a biological system where jealousy comes up,
what makes you think that,
that somehow or another negates the idea of polyamorous relationships?
Well, it does suggest that they're not our default because it doesn't more.
Likely suggest that it encourages competition, which is just natural.
Well, now you think about envy instead of jealousy. And so if I'm jealous,
I'm upset that my wife slept with somebody else last night,
he could be a lowlife. I don't envy a thing about him.
I don't want anything he owns, but I'm jealous of her behavior.
I'm protective of what she's done. And so there's a wonderful experiment.
David bus has run at the university of Texas.
They're the, of course, jealous of the man as well.
You're not just jealous of her behavior.
You're jealous of this other male that gets to have sex with your wife and could
not possibly encourage competition and encourage men to be more
aggressive or more ingenious,
or just create encouraged creativity and courage,
better hunting skills. So you attract more women. I mean,
all those things seem to be.
Yeah, I would agree with all that, but I'd phrase it a little bit differently.
So this is a wonderful study out of the Philippines where they, uh, measured.
Men's huge number of men's testosterone when they were single.
And then they waited a few years and measured it again after they were,
they were still single or now they're married or now they're married and they
have kids. Okay.
And I'm sure it wasn't a psychology study cause we can't afford to do that.
It was probably some medical thing,
but they used a to answer this interesting psychological question,
which what's happened.
Who's most likely to get the girl by their original testosterone levels.
And what happens when you do well,
the guys who got married in the intervening few years had higher testosterone
than the guys who didn't. So yeah, you're absolutely right.
We're out there competing with other males in order to get the girl.
And there's lots and lots that goes on there. Tons of really interesting things.
But what's interesting is once we get the girl, our testosterone drops.
And so if we, once we partner up and if we're in a monogamous relationship,
not polyamorous, but in a monogamous relationship,
our testosterone drops and then it drops again.
If we have kids and testosterone is a great hormone for getting out there and
being competitive with other guys,
it's not a hormone for being nurturant for your children.
And it's not a great hormone for being faithful to your partner.
And so I think that we evolved to compete with other males in order to get into
the meeting game. So if you look at our ancestral DNA,
you know how you can track our ma male and female ancestry through mitochondrial
DNA on the mother's side and wine,
you'll see that we have far more female ancestors than male,
not quite two to one, but I think it's close to that.
And so what does that tell us? Well,
lots of guys are getting left out of the mating game entirely and lots of guys
are inseminating lots of different women.
So all those things that you said are absolutely true and all that pushes us for
competition.
But part of what I believe goes on as part of that competition that we engaged
in was in order to get the girl to get into that relationship in the first
place.
Could I stop you there?
Because I think that if you're going to have a study on testosterone
and you, you have to have a study on lifestyle. I mean, if you,
if you get married and you have children,
one of the things that happens is you become less active. You you'd be,
you don't exercise as much. You don't sleep as much.
All those things have a pretty radical effect on hormone production.
Absolutely. And it could well be that, you know,
you always have to have a proximal mechanism whereby evolution plays its game,
right? So the distal cause is, um, as, as an evolved species,
we testosterone super important to get us into the mating game.
But it's less useful once we're in it. Well, all you could, what you could,
all you have to do is have a system whereby those things tend to down-regulate
testosterone. Exactly. Like you said, cause you know,
those things are gonna happen once you get partnered up. And so, but mind your,
when our ancestors partnered up, they're still out hunting every day. You know,
we may be.
We don't have studies on, we don't.
Unfortunately we don't w the issue is that I'm having with this is we have
studies on the general health and testosterone and hormonal
health of sedentary humans. Yeah. I mean,
I would like to know what their lifestyle is.
I would like to know what they're doing. Doesn't seem to make any sense to me.
Because one thing that everybody knows is that you get dad bod, right?
That's dad bought what his dad bought. Dad bought a guy who works all day,
comes home, sits on the couch, probably eats food. You probably shouldn't eat,
hangs out with his kids. Doesn't get a whole lot of exercise works,
probably doesn't sleep as much as he should. That that's a, to me,
that's a symptom of poor health and fitness.
Right? And it's not a symptom our ancestors ever experienced.
Because it's not,
this is not necessarily an indication of any sort of evolutionary benefit
of having low testosterone,
because we've demonstrated for sure that when people don't get sleep and when
they don't get exercise, their testosterone drops.
So those are two things that absolutely happen when you get married and have
children.
Right. And the only thing I would say is the F times, uh,
the time span of this study was only over a few years.
Even worse.
The thing about having this kind of a study and making these kinds of kind of
conclusions based on, I mean, we see,
we know these mechanisms are in place.
We already know that there's natural effects of sedentary lifestyle,
lack of sleep. And the,
the effects are your hormone production drops. Your body suffers.
You become less healthy. And this is, this is not in indicating monogamy.
This is just indicating poor health.
This is not like an evolutionary advantage to having low testosterone,
because it helps you raise children.
You can have high testosterone and still be a good dad and raise children and
still have the theme. Of course, all these things are bell.
Curves, right? The higher you are, the harder it gets.
I would say, yeah, the problem I'm having is,
is drawing conclusions on this one study and stating them as if they're facts.
You're absolutely right. I, I, if I say as a fact,
it's certainly overstated because we only know the problem with almost all of
our studies is the exact one you point out we've got them on us. Right.
We don't have. And so, like the sex studies are a perfect example.
Like things like female orgasm, what role does it play? Well,
you need really good data on a hunter gatherers to know the answer to that
question. If you look at hunter gatherers, they don't have dad bod, right.
They're all running.
And whether their fathers are not because they're out there hunting every day or
gathering every day, very physically active. So if I, if I oversold that,
my apologies, because you're absolutely right.
I suspect though that you'd find the same thing. I don't know it.
It's all we got right now. Can you suspect it? I mean, it just, there's no data.
Yeah. There is no data. It's.
Just, when you look at these guys, I've, uh, I have a friend of mine who, um,
he was, it was it,
how do you say the name that Yanomami in Bolivia, Bolivia,
Venezuela, Brazil. Yeah. And, uh,
he spent some time with them and you see these people and the lifestyle they
live, they're all barefoot wandering through the jungle.
They have these crazy looking feet where their toes splay out,
because they're just constantly gripping the floor with their toes when they
probably get choke you with their feet, you know?
And these people just look so fit and healthy and they're in their fifties and
sixties and seventies, and they have their shirt off and they're ripped.
Yeah. They're super fit. Same holds. If you look at the Hudson Tanzania,
any of these groups,
the Yanomamo are interesting because they're a hunter horticulturalist.
So they're actually doing a little bit of gardening as well, but they're,
they're, they're ripped and strong and they don't have obesity problems.
And so all I would say is that the same thing holds the one thing that we've
found in humans in our modern culture,
where we have these data is if you're married and have kids,
but you're still looking around your T hasn't gone down as much.
Now you're going to point out quite rightly that, well,
maybe that's a different kind of person than the person who marries and isn't
looking around.
And so it's all confounded super hard to do experiments on these things.
And we'll be a lot better off when we've got, as you know,
we're losing the world's last hunter gatherers are disappearing,
and it's not easy to collect these kinds of data,
but they're doing lots of genetic work with these people right now,
all over Africa. Cause you know, there's,
we've got tons of genetic data now on European descent and east Asian descent,
but almost none on Africans. And so that's a huge project underway.
And so for all I know they're working on hormones and other things as well.
Yeah. That's I mean, the reason why I'm asking about this is you're you were so
readily dismissing. You were so willing to dismiss, uh.
Dawn, but yeah. Well the,
a lot of the facts that are laid out as facts in the book don't really hold up
and um, I wish I'd read it more recently.
And so I could go through the details with you.
There's some really good reviews by anthropologists and by people who work in,
you know, sexual studies and stuff like that, going through the details,
we read it as a,
we haven't this evolutionary center center for psychology and evolution and we
read it and went through it and we weren't convinced I'm embarrassed to admit.
I can't remember. The.
Chris is a very smart guy and he's a good friend of mine, a really great Pam.
It is a great book. I would love to see him debate one of those folks.
I'm sure he probably has.
He probably has. And look,
I know that all these things that we're talking about are heavily debated,
right? So my colleague,
Rob Brooks is a wonderful evolution biologist in Australia loves that book.
So the fact that I think it's is obviously one person's opinion where I'd I
dismiss that argument. Other people might say, well, look,
there's a lot of cultures that do have much more like the system I told you
about where they have sex with lots of men after they have their baby. Right?
You see humans are so flexible. We can do all those things.
We just change the nature of how we do things. Um,
the social leap that I'm arguing about is not this pair bonding thing.
It's about how our groups came together to engage in collective action.
So in principle, I'm agnostic on this issue.
I just happen to disagree with that. I happen to feel like, no,
I think we made these deals.
And so to come back to that study that David buss did that.
I was starting to tell you about, so bus has this, um, he's got,
when he came along,
people thought that the two sexes had similar levels of jealousy for infidelity.
And David was like, well look, inseminations internal.
And so men should be a lot more worried about, uh,
her sleeping with somebody else than women should be because he men never know
for sure if they're the father, they can't see it happen. Whereas, you know,
if you're a salmon, you can say, okay, I'm the debt. I just watched that. But,
um, females that inseminations turtle, but they know they're the mother.
That's not their concern. They should be more concerned about things like, um,
his giving her resources to help her raise the kid and things like that.
And so what BAS found is if you ask people this question,
what would bother you more?
Imagine your wife having sex with somebody that she just met for the first time,
having this great time and doing all these different funky things with them and
then never doing it again. Or your wife develops this, you know, ongoing,
emotional connection with somebody. She never touches him. He never touches her,
but she,
they talk and have shared their feelings and stare deep in each other's eyes.
What would bother you more? And you ask men and women that question. Hmm.
So what would, in your case,
what would bother you Martin to have your wife to know she had this one-off
affair, fling,
sex only didn't care about the guy or she develops a sort of emotional bond with
somebody never touches him. That's a good question.
I'd really have to think about that.
It's not an easy one cause nobody likes either of them.
No. Yeah, because, uh, it's a matter of time before that dude gets in,
that's a Fox chick.
In this case, it's a guarantee, right?
It's a guarantee that they never, never touch.
Never as long as he doesn't talk about me, that's the problem. Those guys go.
They said that, well, I would do so much better. It was a treat. Right? Right.
Well, here's the thing. Weasels.
On average, men are more bothered by sex.
The one-off sex and women are more bothered by the emotional,
emotional connection. Cause.
That's the biggest thing. Transaction could lead to him leaving her. So.
If it's him living our direct in his resources elsewhere. And so, so it's,
it's mind you, every time we talk about gender differences,
it's super important to keep in mind, they're heavily overlapping bell curves,
right? So it's never a hundred percent this way. And except like,
do you have this organ or something,
but psychologically it's always overlapping, but this is a big effect.
Men on average are much more bothered by the one-off sex and women on average
are much more bothered by the emotional connect.
Yeah, that's fascinating. Cause I was reading something about inappropriate,
emotional relationships that people have at work and that this is an issue
with the people that work together. They develop these, you know,
office friendships that lead to inappropriate
emotional relationships. And I was like, whoa, this is a, you know,
I've never worked in an office. So I'm listening to this,
reading this rather than I'm like what a, what a strange world that is like,
I get it though. I get it.
Like if there's a guy and he's married and a gal and she's married,
but they meet at work and they stare at each other's eyes all day and they go to
lunch and maybe they even hold hands every now and then. Well they,
because that's where it crosses the line.
Like you're allowed to hug people when you hold hands. That's,
so that's intense. That's skin, skin. It is serious. It's.
Going to concern you have your partner,
but what's also going to concern you as a mere fact that you see this kind of
thing, this deep conversation happening and all that, because think about it.
If we evolve to basically partner up for a while,
then there's always going to be the chance that that next person along is going
to be the one that wedge is years away,
serial monogamy and both males and females gain from not putting all their eggs
into the same genetic basket. So if my part,
if my wife partners up with you for a while,
she'll get a certain kind of offspring and then maybe that'll be a great thing.
But maybe when the situation changes or the, um, you know, in tomorrow's world,
some smaller wimpier guy would be handy in some way.
And so maybe she's better at partnering with me next.
Interesting. Yeah,
it is fascinating when you break it down that it really does become,
there's a biological reason for these behaviors and
these, the, the motivation for the jealousy and all these things that there's,
there's a history, a biological history to all this.
And,
and we don't know what hunter-gatherer is how they would answer that question.
So we can, we're only just assuming that the answer we're providing is general,
but for me, those kinds of things suggest that we involve,
we evolved in a lot of long-term monogamous circumstances that may have been
serial and there was certainly fooling around. But if we were polyamorous,
like the book says we'd have bigger balls. Why our balls are so big though,
compared to a Chimp they're small. Yeah.
But chimps are, I mean, everything's big with them. Well, no, our peanuts.
Are way bigger than theirs. They got a tiny little.
They've large Paul's smaller penises puppies would probably get in the way.
Right? Well, no, here's.
The thing about,
so human beings copulate for an extraordinarily long period of time. And,
and we also have this cryptic ovulation, you know,
where she's not showing you that she's in heat.
So male chimps aren't interested unless she has that enormous swelling on her
vagina. And then they're like, oh, that's super attractive to me.
But what about Bonobos? Because they.
Well, they do this funky sex thing all the time, right? Yeah. They have fun,
right? Yeah. They're all sorts of funky orgiastic kinds of things we use.
There's a,
when I taught at Ohio state university that the zoo there has a great bone and
bone exhibit and you bring your kids through and there's a serious orgy going on
and the kids are like, came on and she's like, you know.
Yeah. There's a lot of zoos that won't happen Nobles because of that. Right.
Yeah. They're pretty interesting.
And so the thing is that those kinds of things just show you that it's
complicated. Right. Any kind of straightforward answer,
it's going to have some wrinkles in it. Yeah. Yes. Yeah.
And I apologize if I get some earlier. No worries. And so anyway, the, um, the,
uh, but back to this issue,
so if we had a total bonobo Chimp kind of system,
I don't think we'd evolve those systems to jealousy because what's,
what's to be gained by that. We're not making these longterm partners.
Why would you get these differences?
And whenever I bring Chris's book up in,
I have to defend it because it has having a couple times a, the last year. Um,
I haven't read it in at least two years.
I'd have to go back and I read it back over five years ago,
but when it came out, when, um, my friend's wife got ahold of it,
my friend got it. And my friend's wife got all of it and she threw her right.
In a trash, she read like a paragraph or two and she's like, this book.
Uh, a lot of women react that way. And, and I can't remember why. Yeah,
I'm sorry. I just don't have it loaded up whatever.